A Global Combat Air Programme (GCAP) core vehicle concept on display at DSEI, London (Breaking Defense)						

BELFAST The UK says a sixth-generation fighter contract is to be signed in a matter of weeks, in line with bilateral talks held over the weekend between Prime Minister Keir Starmer and Japanese premier Sanae Takaichi.

The flagship project of the Global Combat Air Programme (GCAP) between Italy, Japan and the UK has faced uncertainty amid infighting between the British Ministry of Defence and the Treasury (UK budget office), which has, in collaboration with Starmer, struggled to address a budget shortfall. The inking of the fighter contract could help relieve GCAP partner concerns however.

 During the meeting [in London], the Prime Ministers are expected&#8239;to confirm their shared commitment to the Global Combat Air Programme, and discuss the launch of the next phase of the international programme, including through&#8239;the international contract&#8239;that will&#8239;be signed by the end of the month, the UK Prime Minister s Office said in a Saturday statement.

Italy, Japan and the UK, are committed to the future fighter effort, with a timeframe of 2035 marked as the sixth-generation type s entry to service. However, Tokyo reportedly raised eyebrows at the
 UK holding up
 funding for an existing 686 million ($905 million) design and development contract.

The fragility of GCAP centers around UK financing and the project s operational timeline as Japan desperately needs something for 2035, said Paul Taylor, senior visiting fellow at the Belgian-based, European Policy Centre think tank.

 Japan is facing what they consider a significant Chinese threat, so they have the most skin in this game of the three GCAP partners, while funding of UK defense investments is in flux. 

Former British defense secretary John Healey
 resigned last week
, arguing that a lack of sufficient funding in the long delayed Defence Investment Plan (DIP) could endanger UK security. His departure was followed hours later by Al Carns, former UK armed forces minister.

			presented by		

					Sponsored Post,				

					Air Warfare				

					How integrated modeling and simulation accelerates Europe s defensive edge				

					Lockheed Martin s ACES platform delivers a shared virtual battlespace that strengthens readiness, interoperability, and faster decision-making through advanced, integrated modeling and simulation capabilities designed for evolving global threats.				

		By 		Raashi Quattlebaum - Lockheed Martin