Brazil announced plans to buy an additional 20 Gripen jets on June 4, 2026. Days earlier the two sides rolled out the first Gripen F model, seen here. (Jonas Olsson/Breaking Defense)						

S&Atilde;O JOS&Eacute; DOS CAMPOS, Brazil Brazilian aerospace manufacturer 
Embraer 
expects to increase its final assembly workshare

for Saab s 
JAS 39 Gripen
, in a bid to help meet climbing demand for the fighter jet, according to a company executive.

 Saab is a great partner of ours and we stand ready to support the Swedish manufacturer, Marcio Monteiro, the chief marketing officer of Embraer s defense division, told Breaking Defense in a June 11 interview. 

 We are actually expecting that 

more

Gripen production will be offloaded to us, Monteiro added. We hope that happens soon. 

Assembled by Embraer in Gavi o Peixoto, the Gripen was originally selected by the Brazilian Air Force in 2014. Saab subsequently entered into a technology sharing agreement with Embraer, enabling Bras lia to assemble some of its own Gripens domestically. In March, the first Brazilian-produced Gripen E rolled off Embraer s line, the only assembly facility for the jet outside of Sweden. 

The company is currently committed to deliver 15 Gripens for the Brazilian Air Force, Marcio noted. But we do believe we can do more and help Saab meet their own demand. (Like other outlets, Breaking Defense accepted accommodations from Embraer as part of a media tour of the company s facilities.)

The newest Gripen comes in both single-seat E and twin-seat F configurations, and Brazil s base order encompassed 28 Es and eight Fs. Bras lia now plans to order 20 more of the jets, which would all be E models, according to Brazilian Defense Minister Jos M cio Monteiro Filho

Swedish Defense Minister P l Jonson previously 
told Breaking Defense
 that some Gripen production could be shifted to Brazil. The move would be good for Sweden, because we have our hands full right now, Jonson said on June 6. 

			presented by		

					Sponsored Post,				

					Air Warfare				

					How integrated modeling and simulation accelerates Europe s defensive edge				

					Lockheed Martin s ACES platform delivers a shared virtual battlespace that strengthens readiness, interoperability, and faster decision-making through advanced, integrated modeling and simulation capabilities designed for evolving global threats.				

		By 		Raashi Quattlebaum - Lockheed Martin