Secretary of Defense Pete Hegseth (left) and Under Secretary of Defense for Research Engineering Emil Michael (right) speak in front of a Kratos XQ-58 "Valkyrie" combat drone during a "Drone Day" exhibition at the Pentagon, July 16, 2025. (DoD photo by Navy Petty Officer 1st Class Alexander Kubitza)						

WASHINGTON If Congress does not pass $350 billion in funding through the reconciliation process, the Pentagon will consider cutting expensive traditional weapon systems in order to protect drones, the department s top technologist warned Friday.

Emil Michael, who is both the undersecretary of defense for research and engineering, as well as the 
Pentagon s CTO
, indicated in comments at the 
Hudson Institute
 think tank that the building was prepared to protect its focus on buying large numbers of low-cost, high-tech systems if the reconciliation funding does not come through. 

 If we re forced into that position, we just make other trade-offs, like against exquisite weapons and systems: How much of those are we willing to sacrifice in place of 
low-cost autonomous weapons
? Michael said. It s just like balancing any budget and any portfolio. 

The $350 billion package includes a big chunk for autonomous systems, whether it be 
Saronic
-like systems, mine-detection systems, drones, so on, he said. We just won t be able to buy as much or 
move as fast

on what Michael has termed the AI arsenal.

The White House s 
fiscal 2027 budget request
 came in two flavors: $1.15 trillion in the base discretionary funding, and $350 billion in reconciliation. The decision to push many key modernization efforts, including munitions and drones, into the reconciliation portion has led to concerns from members of Congress that, should reconciliation fall apart, the Pentagon will have to make hard choices about what to fund.

The latest twist came June 9, when two key Republican appropriators, Sens. Susan Collins and Mitch McConnell, 
indicated their belief
 that there was no juice in the upper chamber to pass a defense reconciliation agreement. That led to a rebuke from President Donald Trump, who 
excoriated
 McConnell and other GOP leaders who criticized his spending plans and said on 
Truth Social
 that I am hereby calling on Republicans in Congress to IMMEDIATELY advance and pass the forthcoming $350 Billion Reconciliation Bill. 

For his part, Michael acknowledged the legislature s power of the purse, and emphasized his willingness to make the case to Congress.

 Congress does appropriations, that s what they do. We receive them, and we do the best we can, Michael said. We re willing to meet any Congressman or senator to talk about it. I think the logic is impeccable, but we re in a midterm election year, so weird things happen.