Peter Hultqvist, seen in a 2022 file photo, served as Minister of Defense for eight years. (Photo by David Lidstrom/Getty Images)						

STOCKHOLM The next 
Swedish 
government may consider bringing back an old idea: the government taking an ownership stake in national defense champion 
Saab
.

Peter Hultqvist served as defense minister from 2014 to 2022, and with 
surveys
 showing the red-green opposition bloc leading the incumbent right wing government by more than 10 percentage points, he could well end up taking his old seat back following Sweden s Sept. 13 parliamentary elections. (Asked about his 
interest in the role
, his response was, I m available. )

Speaking to Breaking Defense on the sidelines of a June 12 meeting of the Swedish Defense Commission (F rsvarsberedningen), Hultqvist, his party s representative to the commission, threw his weight behind the idea that the government should have some ownership of one of Europe s biggest defense industries. 

 Well, technically speaking, exactly how it would be done is something we can come back to when it becomes relevant. But we [the Social Democrats] have said that we are interested, from our side, in part-ownership in, for example, Saab because Saab is an industry that is so important to Sweden, and moreover has responsibility for submarines, sensors, and fighter aircraft, Hultqvist said in an interview. 

He added that these defense platforms are Swedish core interests and essential security interests. So I think state part-ownership in Saab would be natural, while at the same time signaling strong Swedish team-building in international contexts. 

Saab spokesperson Mattias R dstr m told Breaking Defense, We have taken note of the information regarding the proposal, but we will not comment on it further. Owner-related matters are for the owners to address. 

The idea has support from Hultqvist s Social Democrats, but also from a potential supporting partner, the Left Party (V nsterpartiet). 

			presented by		

					Sponsored Post,				

					Air Warfare				

					How integrated modeling and simulation accelerates Europe s defensive edge				

					Lockheed Martin s ACES platform delivers a shared virtual battlespace that strengthens readiness, interoperability, and faster decision-making through advanced, integrated modeling and simulation capabilities designed for evolving global threats.				

		By 		Raashi Quattlebaum - Lockheed Martin