The CAPINT Main Battle Tank is seen on display at Eurosatory north of Paris on June 15, 2026. (Photo by Guillaume Baptiste / AFP via Getty Images)						

PARIS European manufacturers have unveiled the 
latest iterations of two 
main battle tanks at Eurosatory, with the Franco-German group KNDS pitching a design for the French Army and Leonardo-Rheinmetall offering one for the Italian Army, both eyeing entry into service by 2030. 

KNDS showcased its new CaPINT 
Maine Battle Tank

for the first time on Monday, advertised as a gap-filler to replace France s aging Leclerc fleet, which is expected to be retired around 2037. 

The French national project was described by the manufacturers as designed to bolster French Army capabilities, with the vehicle to include increased firepower, counter-drone systems, an open digital architecture, and connectivity with robotized wingers, according to KNDS promotional materials, apparently a reference to unmanned ground or aerial systems.

The proposal is based on an upgraded KNDS Deutschland-manufactured chassis derived from the Leopard 2 A8 and features an unmanned Ascalon turret equipped with a 120 mm gun,
 like the Leopard 2 A-RC 3.0 MBT the company

revealed at the show in 2024

. The Franco-German defense group aims to deliver the first units of CaPINT the 2030s, according to a press release.

Another European firm presenting a new mock-up of its MBT at the show here is the Italian-German joint venture between Leonardo and Rheinmetall, Leonardo Rheinmetall Military Vehicles (LRMV), founded in 2024. 

The vehicle, which is still under development, was displayed with a 30 mm remote-operated chain gun to defeat drones. This specific armament, the company said, is key to protecting the tank from high-angle drone strikes thanks to its 85-degree elevation. 

LRMV is currently in negotiations with the Italian Ministry of Defense for the procurement of the MBT for the Italian Army, according to company representatives. They declined declined to comment on the stage of 
the
 talks, but said the firm is aiming for entry into service by the start of the next decade. 

Italian media have previously 
reported
 that Rome s requirements would be for approximately 132 MBTs. 

Beside the tank, at the show Leonardo set out a quadcopter-like drone next to the Leonardo Vulcano 120 mm ammunition. This was done to envision a potential use case in which a laser-guided drone would be deployed to guide ammunition and enable it to shoot targets from farther away.