L3Harris Vampire counter-UAS system equipped an APKWS laser-guided rocket, shown on June 16, 2026 at Eurosatory. (Elisabeth Gosselin-Malo / Breaking Defense)						

PARIS L3Harris 
today

signed an agreement with Turkish drone manufacturer Skydagger to establish co-production of first-person-view drone interceptors in the US for integration into 
the American firm s
 Vampire counter-drone system.

The two companies signed the memorandum of understanding on the sidelines of the Eurosatory trade show, where counter-drone capabilities 
have emerged as a major

topic of interest

.

Under the framework, there will be a transfer of expertise and technology that will allow localized manufacturing of the Turkish-designed FPV interceptors, 
L3Harris s Mike Spina
, told Breaking Defense. 

 We aim to complete the integration of the new capabilities [on the VAMPIRE C-UxS system] this year, said Spina, 
L3Harris head of business development for target and sensor systems.
 This will be the first time the counter-drone system is equipped with interceptor drones. 

The Vampire, showcased for the first time at Eurosatory, is what the company calls a completely self-contained, low-cost, multi-mission, precision-guided weapons platform designed to provide military forces with reconnaissance and precision-strike capabilities against drones. The company advertises the platform on its website as capable of firing a missile, but says 
it can fire a variety of effectors. 

It 
has logged over 350,000 operational hours since 2023 and was selected by the US Army last week as part of Washington s layered counter-drone defense approach in an order valued at $106 million, according to company information.

Earlier this year, L3Harris launched a new production line for the counter-drone system in Huntsville, 
Ala.
, to meet higher demand as a direct response to the US and its allies need to combat widespread drone threats, it said in a press release.

Skydagger, meanwhile, makes several variants of drone including the Hunter interceptor, which the 
company says
 weighs just more than 1 pound and can fly up to nearly 200 miles per hour.

The company 
can currently produce 50,000 FPV interceptors per year, according to Spina. 

Spina said that the company s focus with this new capability will be to defeat 
Group 2 and 3

drones, that is, s
mall- to medium-sized ones, and will include drone-on-drone interception. 

The company forecasts that demand for FPV drones will reach $5.8 billion by 2032.