How Japan Could Co-Produce the Navy’s Future Fleet

 -->

 -->

 When the world's at stake,
 go beyond the headlines.

 National security. For insiders. By insiders.

 National security. For insiders. By insiders.

 Join War on the Rocks and gain access to content trusted by policymakers, military leaders, and strategic thinkers worldwide.

 BECOME A MEMBER

 BECOME A MEMBER

Cogs of War

 How Japan Could Co-Produce the Navy’s Future Fleet 

Jeff Kucik

, 

Noah Moyer

, and 

Darlene Onuorah

June 15, 2026

Cogs of War

Cogs of War

 How Japan Could Co-Produce the Navy’s Future Fleet 

 #Drones 

 #Industrial Policy 

 #Japan 

Jeff Kucik

, 

Noah Moyer

, and 

Darlene Onuorah

June 15, 2026

America s defense industrial base cannot build the Navy out of the threat it faces. Decades of 
industry consolidation
, persistent 
resource shortages
, and 
inconsistent demand signals
 have delayed the production of critical vessels and munitions. With production bottlenecks stacking up, the Navy may have no choice but to let its allies do some of the building.
Both the 

National Defense Strategy

 and 
Navy Warfighting Instructions
 highlight how mobilizing allies can field more forces to the mutual benefit of the United States and its strategic partners. Likewise, the latest 
U.S. Navy Shipbuilding Plan
 stresses the importance of allied investment and production.

The Trump administration has been putting these plans into action, having already outlined plans to coproduce platforms like 
icebreakers
 and 
submarines
. The next step is robotic and uncrewed systems, which 
play a central role in Golden Fleet concepts
. To that end, the United States, United Kingdom, and Australia recently 
agreed to codevelop undersea submersibles
 as part of AUKUS Pillar II s commitment to share advanced capabilities.

The AUKUS announcement should just be the start. Coproduction of uncrewed systems with capable partners, including countries like Japan, could expand total defense output, helping deliver the 
thousands of low-cost
, attritable systems 
required to deter
 and win protracted conflicts.

Japan stands out as a place to put this principle into practice. However, successful coproduction is not guaranteed. Although Japan is well-positioned to support high-tech manufacturing at scale, there are still significant legal, political, and security barriers on both sides of the Pacific. Overcoming these barriers, including security risks overseas and political resistance to offshoring in the United States, requires the correct balance of policy and financial incentives.

Sign Up for Our Newsletter

The Demand for Coproduction

Constraints on the U.S. defense industrial base are 
well documented
. 
Labor scarcity
, 
supply chain vulnerabilities
, and 
aging infrastructure

delay new vessel construction
. Meanwhile, 
complex acquisition policies
 and fluctuating demand signals 
discourage defense firms
 from making the investments necessary to expand their capacity.

Investments in shipyards 
by U.S. entities and foreign firms
 aim to fix these problems by 
modernizing old infrastructure
 and production methods. But infrastructure investments 
take time to mature
, and even if domestic manufacturers could produce within the United States, coproduction would still yield strategic gains. Not least, transporting assets to the Western Pacific is 
costly and time-consuming
. That tyranny of distance 
complicates U.S. Navy logistics
 and limits time in theater.

Coproduction
, most likely to take the form of licensing existing designs, offers a way to manufacture assets at scale closer to where they are needed. Producing robotic and autonomous systems within the First Island Chain would ensure assets are near the area of operation the moment they roll off the assembly line. And although these factories would be located within striking distance of adversaries, allied coproduction offers opportunities to field more forces while 
distributing production away from
 just a few critical sites. That is why the 2026 National Defense Authorization Act includes provisions for 
drone coproduction with Taiwan
. Similarly, plans were announced in 2025 to 
produce and store munitions in the Philippines
. In both cases, overseas production, while not without risks, aims to bolster mutual security by building a 
more secure, interconnected network
 in the region.

Japan s Potential 

Japan stands out as a candidate for drone coproduction given its 
history of security cooperation
 with the U.S. Navy. It is home to the Navy s 
Regional Maintenance Centers
 at Sasebo and Yokosuka, indicating its 
modernized infrastructure
 to support work on Navy assets and systems. Numerous Japanese 
firms have the required capacity and expertise
, including 
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries
, a major global shipbuilder, pre-certified through 
Master Ship Repair Agreements
.

Although coproduction is relatively limited with most allies, the United States and Japan have a track record of joint defense manufacturing. Current efforts include the licensed manufacturing of 
Patriot Advanced Capability-3
 missiles and 
Mk-41 Vertical Launch Systems
, and the joint research and development of the complex 
SM-3 Block IIA interceptor
 demonstrates Japan s capability to share the research and development burden for highly complex defense technologies. There is existing political and strategic scaffolding to support additional security cooperation, like Golden Fleet.

For example, Japan s automated smart factories with 
precision robots
 are 
capable of rapid assembly
 involving repeated tasks like the manufacturing of aerial and 
maritime drones
. In addition, Japanese innovations in materials and components, such as lightweight 
carbon fibers
, heat-resistant 
ceramics
, and 
lithium-ion batteries
, can 
enhance the durability and range
 of robotic and autonomous systems assets.

Unlocking Manufacturing Capacity Brings New Risks

Despite the economic opportunities, unlocking Japan s manufacturing capacity also introduces some risks.

Japan s homegrown 
drone industry is small
 and 
relies heavily on imports
, particularly electronic components from China. The broader electronics industry, including control and guidance components built into drones, is similarly 
import-dependent
, in 
critical minerals
 and 
materials supply chains
. Although working with Japan could unlock manufacturing capacity, it does not solve the problem of adverse penetration or control of upstream supply, nor eliminate foreign dependencies for America and its allies.

But it does help shore up critical supply chains where possible. Neither Japan nor the United States 
has sufficient domestic supplies
 of minerals like graphite or gallium. However, greater policy coordination, including trade deals focused on 
critical supply chain security
, helps internalize the risk by incentivizing allied trade through favorable market concessions.

Similarly, resource shortages, including a 
shallow labor pool
, are a problem in Japan and many other 
advanced industrialized economies
. But coordinated production can help internalize that risk.

The same is true of 
sharing advanced technologies
. Most notably, 
Rapidus
 is a 
state-led effort
 to restore Japan s semiconductor industry by combining Japanese resources with IBM s expertise to create new, advanced semiconductor fabrication plants. The focus has been on 
advanced, high-end chips
 with dual-use applications. Targeting two-nanometer semiconductor production, these investments promise chips with greater processing speeds, 
well-suited
 for fast decision-making in AI-enabled robotic and autonomous systems.

Those chip investments, along with similar U.S. efforts, help internalize the design and production of next-generation chips for future forces.

Regional and Domestic Policy Barriers Remain

Regional competition incentivizes U.S.-Japanese security cooperation, but it also generates challenges. Tokyo and Washington share an interest in 
deterring conflict with China
 and 
maintaining freedom of navigation
. Japan s U.S. treaty alliance, along with the two countries 
technology-sharing agreements
 and recently 
increased defense spending
, signals commitment.

However, Japan s actions are 
watched closely
 in the region. China, North Korea, and Russia routinely frame any Japanese efforts to mobilize defense manufacturing as offensive posturing. Political statements on freedom of navigation, especially around Taiwan, have 
exposed Japan to accusations of militarism
 and agitation. And Japan s domestic 
policy changes
, including 
revisions to
 export controls that now permit the export of previously restricted defense items, have 
triggered Chinese opposition
.

There are also domestic political barriers. The April 2026 revision to export controls was a milestone, but it 
was contested
 and 
took years to negotiate
, and does not answer the question of how Japan will respond to specific coproduction requests for offensive-capable systems. Even after reform, there are still 
significant internal frictions
 within the ruling coalition as well as 
public sensitivity toward remilitarization
. Japan s scientific community, for example, has 
been skeptical of
 recent defense-related 
research and development efforts
.

Assets like 
anti-mining submersibles
 and 
aerial surveillance drones
 are among the recent spending priorities covered in 
Japan s recent coastal defense spending
. However, offensive capabilities, like one-way attack drones, will likely be a much harder sell politically and regionally. That means, although deeper security cooperation is possible, coproduction arrangements may have to exclude certain capabilities.

Overcoming the Foreign Hurdles 

Coproduction requires political effort. Within the United States and abroad, strict export restrictions and other controls on sharing sensitive technologies can 
impede collaboration
. Take, for example, the 
difficulties making progress
 on AUKUS Pillar II. Differences in classification schemes and clearances for personnel, both of which exist for good reasons, unintentionally 
limit cooperation
.

The Pillar II experience shows that, even among close allies, there is need for lasting 
political commitments

amid changing leadership
. But the AUKUS members recent 
push toward undersea drone development
 signals persistence.

Coproducing robotic and autonomous systems will test whether the U.S. and Japan can build upon their existing foundation to establish joint standards for technology sharing and clarify operational requirements early in the process. Luckily, drone manufacturing may be a lower hurdle than ship or missile production, particularly given Japan s recent moves 
to incentivize dual-use technologies
. Like 
in the United States,
 Japan is betting on a wider set of firms being able to produce drones than just the major shipbuilders. In the last few years, Japan has passed legislation 
focused on advanced technology development
, including the 
creation of the Defense Innovation Science and Technology Institute
, similar to the American Defense Innovation Unit.

Coproduction also requires buy-in from partners. Licensed manufacturing, whereby a foreign firm may simply print 
units of an established design
, is attractive because it produces ready-made forces while skipping over the 
costly design
, testing, and evaluation phases. But licensed manufacturing generates little enthusiasm overseas, as partner governments and firms typically prefer to 
play a more active role
 in development. Co-development increases the potential gains from technology transfer and information sharing while also allowing partner countries to play a more direct role in shaping capabilities for their individual needs. Therefore, although licensed manufacturing is a potentially lower-cost option, future coproduction efforts will likely have to carry 
a promise of incremental expansion
 toward more sought-after co-development and sustainment plans.

Overcoming Domestic Barriers

Coproduction with Japan will also run into resistance in Washington. Members of Congress from shipbuilding and defense&#8209;industrial districts have strong incentives to keep high&#8209;value production and jobs inside the United States. Proposals that sound like offshoring defense manufacturing, especially for critical technologies, are 
likely to face skepticism from both parties
. Labor unions and major defense primes, which have invested heavily in existing U.S. facilities, may also 
oppose arrangements
 that appear to shift work overseas.

Recent legislation and political rhetoric reinforce this dynamic. Both the previous and current administrations 
have emphasized re&#8209;shoring 
 and friend&#8209;shoring 
critical supply chains
, and Congress has funded substantial incentives to 
expand domestic semiconductor
 and 
shipbuilding capacity
. When discussing coproduction, simply asserting that allies can build cheaper systems will not overcome concerns about losing industrial jobs, eroding the defense industrial base, or transferring sensitive technologies abroad.

Yet the pressing need for uncrewed systems is already 
driving organizational shifts
 and 
motivating faster acquisitions
. When framing arguments for coproduction, security cooperation planners should stress to stakeholders that coproduction may very well be in addition to not in lieu of domestic manufacturing. For example, the current administration s emphasis on burden-sharing aims to mobilize overseas manufacturing for joint security. Burden-sharing efforts focus primarily 
on increasing arms sales to critical allies
, but there is also an opportunity for U.S. firms to license their designs abroad, providing partners with proven and interoperable capabilities.

Coproduction also presents a way to complement efforts to keep U.S. manufacturing online, taking advantage of manufacturing capacity overseas while U.S. investments mature. Coproduction does not have to mean placing fewer orders with domestic contractors. Instead, it means licensing out designs to capable foreign firms, adding critical assets to help meet the Navy s force readiness goals while increasing joint security.

Licensing fees may be smaller than sales of U.S.-made assets, which means coproduction will require the proper financial incentives. Defense planners and firms will have to agree on fair compensation to incentivize licensing while keeping overseas production costs affordable. Making those determinations will depend on the partner country and technology, and prices will ultimately make or break cooperation.

Moving Forward

Allies and partners can help the Navy meet force design and readiness but it requires that the correct political, legal, and financial challenges are overcome. Japan highlights what some of those challenges are: a heavily import-reliant economy as well as political tensions both at home and in the region. Add to that the barriers within the United States, including strict export limits, and it becomes clear that coproduction is a daunting task.

But self-sufficient defense production has been tried for decades and has not worked. The Navy has too few new ships and too few ready ships due to challenges facing the domestic industrial base. Coproduction, initially through licensing of existing technology, offers a workaround. U.S. plans and strategies increasingly recognize the untapped manufacturing capacity abroad. If allies can produce at a reasonable cost, with fair compensation for licensed capabilities, then deeper, more robust coproduction arrangements are well worth the effort.

Write for Cogs of War

Jeffrey Kucik, Ph.D., is a research scientist at the Center for Naval Analyses and a fellow at New York University s Wahba Initiative for Strategic Competition. 

Noah Moyer is a research assistant at the Center for Naval Analyses. 

Darlene Onuorah is an associate research analyst at the Center for Naval Analyses. 

The views expressed are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the opinions of the Center for Naval Analyses, the U.S. Navy, or the U.S. government.

Image: Petty Officer 1st Class Robert Zahn via 
DVIDS
.

Get the Brief

Subscribe to our free Cogs of War newsletter for sharp analysis and grounded insights from technologists, builders, and policymakers.

SIGN UP