Soldiers from Alpha Battery, 1st Battalion, 82nd Field Artillery Regiment, 1st Armored Brigade Combat Team, 1st Cavalry Division, draw 155mm Base Burn Dual Purpose Improved Conventional Munition rounds. (U.S. Army photo by 2nd Lt. Gabriel Jenko, 1st Battalion, 82nd Field Artillery Regiment, 1st Armored Brigade Combat Team, 1st Cav. Div.)						

WASHINGTON 
General Atomics Electromagnetic Systems
 (GA-EMS) 
announced
 it was awarded a contract to develop a 
155-mm
 projectile for the Army s Extended Range Artillery Projective (ERAP) program, joining 
General Dynamics Ordnance and Tactical Systems
 (GD-OTS) and 
BAE Systems
 who were previously awarded for the program. 

 Over time we have expanded our production capacity, advanced our scaling innovations, and reinforced our readiness to design, qualify, produce, and deliver next&#8209;generation munitions. Scott Forney, president of GA-EMS said in a company release Friday. This award confirms that GA&#8209;EMS is ready to deliver extended&#8209;range, precision capabilities that give the warfighter unmatched standoff range and lethality. 

The ERAP program, also referred to as the XM1155 program, was kickstarted in 2024 and is the Army s initiative to find a 155-mm projectile that can hit moving targets
 at ranges beyond 65 km (40 miles)

such as 
self-propelled howitzers
, infantry fighting vehicles, multiple rocket launchers, tanks and maritime targe
ts. 
The XM1155 was previously being developed under the 
now scrapped
 Extended Range Cannon Artillery (ERCA) program.

According to an Army 
request for information
 from 2024, the service is seeking solutions that can reach Initial Operational Capability (IOC) fielding by fiscal year 2030 and begin low-rate production by the second quarter of FY29. The solutions must also be compatible with existing and future howitzers, the Army 
later stated,
 with the latter referring to the Army s current self-propelled howitzer competition which the service is 
expected to award next month
. 

GA-EMS announcement comes a week after 
GD-OTS announced
 it was also awarded a developmental contract
 under the ERAP program for its 
Vulcano 155 Guided Long Range system. The Vulcano is developed by Italian firm Leonardo Electronics and German firm Diehl Defence. GD-OTS is in charge of transitioning the production lines into the United States, per the company s release. 

 The system can achieve [a] range of up to 70 kilometers with high precision, enabled by advanced aerodynamics, GPS guidance and a Semi-Active Laser (SAL) terminal seeker, GD-OTS release from June 5 read. In addition to the SAL seeker configuration, the ammunition is also available with advanced Far-Infra Red seeker capable of engaging Sea Targets. Both configurations can provide precision engagement even in GPS-contested environments. 

According to the 
Defense Department s Ordnance Technology
 website, BAE Systems was also awarded a contract to develop its version of the new 155-mm projectile. However, the company has not released any announcements on the matter, and the company did not respond to a request for comment about the award.